[PoC] Shared OpenTelemetry Collector vs Individual Collectors Per Signal Type (#763)
kyma-project/community: concepts/observability-strategy/configurable-monitoring/pocs/shared-vs-per-sinal-type-collector/README.md

# Shared OpenTelemetry Collector vs Individual Collectors Per Signal Type 

## Goal 
The [OpenTelemetry collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/) is a core component of Kyma Telemetry. It receives different telemetry signals (tracing, metrics, and, in the future, logs), filters and augments them and sends them to the respective backends. The goal of the PoC is to determine the pros and cons of having a single shared collector with different pipelines per signal type versus having an indvidual collector per signal type.

## Ideas

### Scaling

> The decision of whether to share the collector for all signal types or to keep them separate comes down to the question of scaling. In practice, each type may have different scaling needs and require different scaling strategies. Since we don't yet know enough about our users' telemetry data trends, having separate collectors would give us more flexibility in the future. The tracing collector will most likely remain a stateless gateway that receives, filters, augments, and pushes race data to the configured backend. Such a gateway can easily scale horizontally by adding more replicas and load balancing between them. Metrics collection is a bit more complicated, as we need to combine a push gateway (stateless) and Prometheus scrapers (statefull). The scrapers do not scale horizontally and should be sharded. See more about [how to scale an OpenTelemetry collector] (https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/scaling/). It's also not uncommon for workloads to generate different amounts of signals of different types. In this case, having separate collectors allows us to scale only what is needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The decision of whether to share the collector for all signal types or to keep them separate comes down to the question of scaling. In practice, each type may have different scaling needs and require different scaling strategies:

* Since we don't yet know enough about our users' telemetry data trends, having separate collectors would give us more flexibility in the future.
* Push and Pull Gateways are scaled differently: The tracing collector will most likely remain a push gateway (stateless) that receives, filters, augments, and pushes race data to the configured backend. Such a gateway can easily scale horizontally by adding more replicas and balancing the load between them. Using Prometheus, the metrics collector is a pull gateway (stateful) that scrapes the metrics from the configured targets. Adding more replicas would result in that all replicas scrape the the same targets. The scrapers do not scale horizontally and should be sharded. See more about [how to scale an OpenTelemetry collector] (https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/scaling/). 
* Workloads may generate different amounts of signals of different types. In this case, having separate collectors allows us to scale only what is needed.
```

### Implementation

When implementing Kubernetes operators, it's common practice to have a single controller per custom resource. The Telemetry Manager is no exception. It has a `LogPipelineController` and a `TracePipelineController`. There is also a `LogParserController`, but it's not a standalone thing and is more of an extension of the `LogPipelineController`. 

Each controller reconsiles it's own custom resource, translates it to a respective configuration (FluentBit or OpenTelemetry Collector), and deploys the resources. Imagine we implement a new `MetricPipelineController`, so that it shares the deployed OpenTelemetry Collector with the `TracePipelineController`. This would have some major drawbacks:

> * Both controllers will have to share at least the configuration rendering code that contains both metric and tracing pipelines. If there iss a bug in the configuration rendering logic, it will affect both metrics and traces

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both controllers will have to share at least the configuration rendering code that contains both metric and tracing pipelines. If there is a bug in the configuration rendering logic, it will affect both metrics and traces
```

### Implementation

When implementing Kubernetes operators, it's common practice to have a single controller per custom resource. The Telemetry Manager is no exception. It has a `LogPipelineController` and a `TracePipelineController`. There is also a `LogParserController`, but it's not a standalone thing and is more of an extension of the `LogPipelineController`. 

Each controller reconsiles it's own custom resource, translates it to a respective configuration (FluentBit or OpenTelemetry Collector), and deploys the resources. Imagine we implement a new `MetricPipelineController`, so that it shares the deployed OpenTelemetry Collector with the `TracePipelineController`. This would have some major drawbacks:
Both controllers will have to share at least the configuration rendering code that contains both metric and tracing pipelines. If there is a bug in the configuration rendering logic, it will affect both metrics and traces
* Both controllers will be reconciling the same resources (restarting the controller pod, etc.), possibly interfering with each other

As we can see, having a shared collector also presents certain implementation challenges.

### Single Endpoint

> From the usablity point of view it would be handy to provide a single endpoint to push telemetry data in the OTLP format. It's possible to do it using URL rewriting, so e.g. requests targeting "telemetry.kyma-system.svc.cluster.local/metrics" are forwarded to the metrics gateway and "telemetry.kyma-system.svc.cluster.local/traces"

Reviewer 2: I think the actual paths are `/v1/metrics` and `/v1/traces`

Author: Makes sense, yes. Those were some random URLs to make the example easily understandable :)

to the tracing gateway. There are a few possibilities to implement it:
*  [Istio Virtual Service](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/networking/virtual-service/) using the default `mesh` gateway

> * [Kubernetes Ingress](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/), which requires deploying an Ingress Controller

Reviewer 2: Is there a way to deploy an "internal" ingress? I am only aware of annotations that would expose the ingress to an internal network. But this is very specific to the used load-balancer implementation, so probably not feasible for this use-case. Maybe add this limitations.

Author: You are right, I just checked and there is no generic mechanism, it's hyperscaler-specific. I would remove it completely since in this case deploying a custom HTTP proxy would be much easier.

> # Shared OpenTelemetry Collector vs Individual Collectors Per Signal Type 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Shared OpenTelemetry collector vs. individual collectors per signal type 
```

## Goal 
The [OpenTelemetry collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/) is a core component of Kyma Telemetry. It receives different telemetry signals (tracing, metrics, and, in the future, logs), filters and augments them and sends them to the respective backends. The goal of the PoC is to determine the pros and cons of having a single shared collector with different pipelines per signal type versus having an individual collector per signal type.

## Ideas

### Scaling

The decision of whether to share the collector for all signal types or to keep them separate comes down to the question of scaling. In practice, each type may have different scaling needs and require different scaling strategies:

* Since we don't yet know enough about our users' telemetry data trends, having separate collectors would give us more flexibility in the future.

> * Push and pull gateways are scaled differently. The tracing collector will most likely remain a push gateway (stateless) that receives, filters, augments, and pushes race data to the configured backend. Such a gateway can easily scale horizontally by adding more replicas and balancing the load between them. Metrics collection is a bit more complicated, as we need to combine a push gateway with an OTLP receiver (stateless) and Prometheus scrapers (statefull). The scrapers do not scale horizontally and should be sharded. See more about [how to scale an OpenTelemetry collector] (https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/scaling/). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Push and pull gateways are scaled differently. The tracing collector will most likely remain a push gateway (stateless) that receives, filters, augments, and pushes race data to the configured backend. Such a gateway can be easily scaled horizontally by adding more replicas and balancing the load between them. Metrics collection is a bit more complicated, as we need to combine a push gateway with an OTLP receiver (stateless) and Prometheus scrapers (stateful). The scrapers do not scale horizontally and should be sharded. See more about [how to scale OpenTelemetry Collector] (https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/scaling/). 
```

> * Workloads may generate different amounts of signals of different types. In this case, having separate collectors allows us to scale only what is needed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Workloads may generate different numbers of signals of different types. In this case, having separate collectors allows us to scale only what is needed.
```

### Implementation

When implementing Kubernetes operators, it's common practice to have a single controller per custom resource. The Telemetry Manager is no exception. It has a `LogPipelineController` and a `TracePipelineController`. There is also a `LogParserController`, but it's not a standalone thing and is more of an extension of the `LogPipelineController`. 

Each controller reconsiles it's own custom resource, translates it to a respective configuration (FluentBit or OpenTelemetry Collector), and deploys the resources. Imagine we implement a new `MetricPipelineController`, so that it shares the deployed OpenTelemetry Collector with the `TracePipelineController`. This would have some major drawbacks:

> Both controllers will have to share at least the configuration rendering code that contains both metric and tracing pipelines. If there is a bug in the configuration rendering logic, it will affect both metrics and traces

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Both controllers will have to share at least the configuration rendering code that contains both metric and tracing pipelines. If there is a bug in the configuration rendering logic, it will affect both metrics and traces.
```

> * Both controllers will be reconciling the same resources (restarting the controller pod, etc.), possibly interfering with each other

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Both controllers will be reconciling the same resources (restarting the controller pod, etc.), possibly interfering with each other.
```

As we can see, having a shared collector also presents certain implementation challenges.

> ### Single Endpoint

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Single endpoint
```

> From the usablity point of view it would be handy to provide a single endpoint to push telemetry data in the OTLP format. It's possible to do it using URL rewriting, so e.g. requests targeting "telemetry.kyma-system.svc.cluster.local/v1/metrics" are forwarded to the metrics gateway and "telemetry.kyma-system.svc.cluster.local/v1/traces"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
From the usability point of view, it would be handy to provide a single endpoint to push telemetry data in the OTLP format. It's possible to do it using URL rewriting, so, for example, requests targeting `telemetry.kyma-system.svc.cluster.local/v1/metrics` are forwarded to the metrics gateway and `telemetry.kyma-system.svc.cluster.local/v1/traces` are forwarded
```

to the tracing gateway. There are a few possibilities to implement it:
*  [Istio Virtual Service](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/networking/virtual-service/) using the default `mesh` gateway
* An HTTP proxy with a hard-coded configuration to rewrite the request URLs

The first approach is the easiest one, the only drawback is a hard dependency on Istio.

> ### Signal Translation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Signal translation
```

> It is sometimes necessary to convert signals from one signal type to another. Signal translations may be direct one-to-one operations or include derivative signals such as counts, aggregations, summarizations, etc. It is possible to, let's say, convert traces to metrics in the trace gateway using the [spanmetricsprocessor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/spanmetricsprocessor) and send them to the metric gateway, which in turn would send them to the backend. However, a shared collector is advantageous in this case because it can do it in-process without performing additional network calls.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is sometimes necessary to convert signals from one signal type to another. Signal translations may be direct one-to-one operations or include derivative signals such as counts, aggregations, summarizations, etc. It is possible to, let's say, convert traces to metrics in the trace gateway using [Span Metrics Processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/spanmetricsprocessor) and send them to the metric gateway, which in turn would send them to the backend. However, a shared collector is advantageous in this case because it can do it in-process without performing additional network calls.
```

## Proposal

> It becomes clear that having an individual collector per signal type has a lot of advantages and gives us flexibility to come up with a good scaling strategy later.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It becomes clear that having an individual collector per signal type has a lot of advantages and gives us the flexibility to develop a good scaling strategy in the future.
```
